
We're Beats and In. So this is a podcast with Dalip Singh of PGIM, also known as Prudential. And- It's actually an acronym that stands for nothing. Those are in, I hear. Yes, but it is the Asset Management Arm of Prudential. Well, I would like you to keep those assets going fine because I know people depend on them a lot. So, my uncle was an insurance executive at AIG right over here, here in Houston, although he was in the New York territory, so he would always tell us about products. Nothing about insurance as it turns out, but I know something about asset management. With your background, so the first question I wanted to ask you, we have a lot of students here getting public policy, public administration degrees. Could you tell me a little bit about what you got out of your experience at Harvard and MIT doing a joint degree and how it prepared you for your career? Well, I have to start further back. I grew up as an Indian American, as part of an immigrant family in North Carolina, mostly in the 80s and 90s, and of course my dad wanted me to be a doctor. And so naturally I resisted. And I was always interested in the stories my mom would tell about her father because he was a public servant in India before, during, and after partition. And she told me stories about him going to jail when he would protest in order to try to secure more rights and freedoms for Indians and then also for Sikhs within Punjab in the aftermath of partition. And I always thought to myself, I'd like to one day make a contribution at a time that felt consequential. So I was drawn to public policy as an undergrad, that's what I majored in, in addition to economics. And when coming out of undergrad, I had a lot of debt. I had hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt and I worked my way through college but still had to get out of this pile of repayment obligations. So I became a management consultant, mostly because someone told me it might be a way to start making some money and to see the world a bit, both of which were appealing to me. So I did and I pretty soon realized I hated it, that I just didn't care all that much about whether Procter and Gamble developed better toothpaste in order to gain market share. No disrespect to Procter and Gamble or to management consulting, but it wasn't for me. And I was much more interested in what's on the front of the paper. How is the world changing, why, where, and to what extent? So I thought, let me go back to grad school. And maybe I can learn enough about macroeconomics and policy and entrepreneurship. And I could start companies in poor countries and essentially try to do good by doing well. That's why I did both programs. I did an MBA and an MPA, so both public policy and business, business at MIT, an MPA at Harvard. But this was the tail end of the dot-com bubble. It was bursting. And no one was going to fund a recent graduate with no experience starting companies, much less working in a developing country. So there was no funding available. And I had to get a real job. And now I had $300,000 more in debt. So I took the only job that was offered to me. There was only one offer. And it was at Goldman Sachs. And they just had a tendency, I think, to take a chance on wild cards. I'd never taken a finance course. And I didn't like people in finance, I thought. I don't know if I can curse on the podcast. I mean, it's state university. OK. I thought many of the people I knew that were going into finance were jerks. Well said. And I didn't want to do that. But that was my motivation. And that's kind of what happened afterwards. So basically, you end up going to Goldman. And somehow you make a leap to public service. So can you tell me a little bit about how that happened? So I hated it at first. And this is in New York at headquarters. On the trading floor. And again, I knew almost nothing about finance. And I kept making mistakes over and over and over again. And I felt like I was being asked to speak a foreign language without any textbook or class in how to speak that language. So I remember spending every day writing down concepts or terms that I didn't understand and for which I was too scared to get an answer. Because when I tried to get an answer often, there would be profanity-laced responses. And so eventually I stopped asking. But I did learn over time. And I began to figure out there's actually a cool niche in finance in the world of global macro. Which is to say, I mentioned before, I was interested in how is the world changing where and why. And that's basically the substance of what global macro investing involves. You're betting on whether countries are going to rise and fall and why. And you can express your beliefs about those trends through currencies, through interest rates, through equities, all sorts of different instruments. And it's kind of like an art form. Your job is to understand what the market is expressing. And if you disagree, disagree artfully, differently. So I began to enjoy it a little bit. And I stayed for about eight years, about half the time in New York, half the time in London, initially focusing on US interest rates and then eventually on emerging markets. So this takes me to about 2011. By this point, we're living in London, I've got three kids, five, three, and one. And my wife and I were getting tired of living in what seemed to be a Tupperware bowl. It was gray and cloudy and raining almost every day. We wanted to be closer. We wanted our kids, our young kids, to be close enough to their grandparents so that they would know them. And as it turns out, my parents were still in North Carolina. My wife's parents were nearby as well. So I wanted to move somewhere in the Mid-Atlantic, outside of a financial center. Well, one day, a colleague of mine at Goldman said, "'Hey, I'm going to the US Treasury.'" And I was fascinated. I asked him, "'What does that involve?' And he gave me an answer, I didn't understand it. But I said, "'Hey, look, if at any point you believe there could be a role for someone like me, someone on the front line of markets that's trying to figure out how the world's changing and expressing my answer through financial instruments, if there's a role for someone like me, give me a shout. Because we're sort of ready to make a change. And I've always wanted to do public service at a moment that felt consequential.'" And this was after the financial crisis. I learned a few things about how markets work well and how they don't. And I wanted to make a contribution. It felt like that kind of moment. So about a year later, he and a few others from Treasury rang me up and said, "'Hey, Secretary Geithner has just come down from the New York Fed. He had an army of people who were analyzing markets for him there. Now he doesn't have anything like that at Treasury. But he's being hauled into the White House to explain what's going on in financial markets and why are they so dysfunctional? Why can't we fix markets and the economy? And he would like to have some on the ground intel. So can you help build a room or a department that does that?' And I said, "'Absolutely, I can do that.'" And so the offer was to be a mid-level civil servant working in the dungeon of the Treasury where condensate was dripping from the ceiling and diesel fumes were pouring in from the Secret Service trucks that were idling outside. And I did it. And it was very scary. Everybody on the way out called me a moron and said, "'Why would you take a 90% pay cut?' And I said, "'Well, that actually makes me feel better about my decision because I'm making a contrarian bet on myself.'" And I loved it. And so that's how I got into public service. 

That's a fantastic story. The pay cut, I mean, I got the same thing when I left technology to go to the State Department. I was like, what are you, I mean, even the people who hired me are like, "'Are you a moron? Are you stupid?' That's the call of public service. Sure. And it's scary. But you know, you have to understand yourself I think and if you're wired differently and you know what you're optimizing for and I wanted to optimize on my contribution to society and have a better work-life balance. I thought I was going to get a work-life balance. That turns out to have been wrong but you know I knew my why and that was enough for me to go. The why is so important. Yeah and you don't have to explain it to anybody else. You have to just understand it for yourself. Right. And I actually think it doesn't even have to make sense to yourself in the moment. It only has to make sense at the end. So I've had, I don't know if you feel this way Chris, I've had many moments in my career, my nonlinear and somewhat incoherent career in which in the moment I thought I was making a mistake and then I began to stop judging moments and I began to kind of take a more confusion approach which is to say allow years to pass before deciding whether that decision was good or bad because you don't know the path dependence of decision making. You don't know what, how a mistake or a setback was necessary for the subsequent opportunity to arise. You don't know that at the moment. You only know it years, maybe decades later. So when somebody asks me do you enjoy what you're doing now, I almost never answer. I will say ask me, ask me decades from now. Yeah how does it all turn out? I don't know yet. Yeah. That's not an easy thing to tell 22 year olds. No, I mean it's because they're getting advice from parents often very firm guidance. Maybe it's not even a choice they're offering. They're telling you. And you know there's a lot of group think. I followed the herd. That's why I went into management consulting and it was in retrospect kind of cowardly if I'm critiquing myself. So you know it takes it takes some emotional maturity to start deviating from the pack. But I don't regret it. Well as I would have said a few years ago in another place, estoy de acuerdo. I agree. I understand. Being a Kacharian is right and fun and sometimes difficult. Well I have a good understanding of how you got to treasury. Now you made a leap to the White House. Can you you know people always ask this question. How do you how do you get close to the president? You know I have colleagues who are my age who will say I really want to make a difference. How do I how do I be you know President Biden's expert? You know I am an expert on all this stuff. So how do I how do I get there? You know and so if you could kind of expand on you know your career at the treasury went extremely well. You became an acting assistant secretary. Acting is the the greatest term for government dysfunction by the way as far as I'm concerned having been acting office directors and things like that. And certainly not at the assistant secretary level though. But can you tell me a little bit about the leap from from being in a department which I really get to how you made it over to the White House, how it worked, what it was like so people can understand listening to this. This is the difference between just working for the government and being close to the executive team of the United States of America. I mean, Chris, the only honest answer is I don't know. I mean, it's almost like serendipity or some kind of forced gum story or dumb luck in my case. So I spent six years at Treasury and I had a number of different roles. I started out in the dungeon, but after a while I started watching how policy got made and at some point, Lael Brainard, who at the time was the Undersecretary of International Finance, she said, you know, you really do understand markets. You're able to translate the message of markets to senior policy makers here and you help us understand how different policy choices have different implications for markets and therefore the economy. But don't you wanna do the cool stuff? And I asked what she meant and she responded, the cool stuff is making policy. In other words, taking risk, just like you did in the investment world, making policy is the equivalent here in DC. And, you know, so I agree. I didn't really respond, but I completely agreed mentally. So, you know, I waited for my opportunity to move into policy making. She initially offered me, she made the initial offer for me to do so because there was a chance to run the Europe and Eurasia team as a Deputy Assistant Secretary. I jumped at the opportunity. It became a series of crisis management exercises because the sovereign debt crisis in Europe was raging and then Ukraine and Crimea was invaded and then we had to figure out how to sanction a large connected complex economy like Russia for the first time and then Greece was about to exit the Euro. And all of those were tests that allowed me to demonstrate what I could do. And I began to interact with people from the White House who cared about the outcome of those issues. So I met, for example, that's where I met Jake Sullivan. He was at the time Vice President Biden's National Security Advisor. And I was in meetings with him only because Treasury, when Lail Brainerd left, we didn't yet have an Under Secretary. So I was sitting in that vacancy acting on behalf of Treasury. Now, I then moved into the domestic side. That's when I became an Acting Assistant Secretary for Financial Markets and it was kind of deal with the debt crisis closer to home in Puerto Rico and figure out how we can manage the federal debt. And I was enjoying that too. But then the election of 2016 happened and it was time to go. So I did. And I thought, okay, now it's time to repair my balance sheet and take care of my family a bit. So I went back to the investment world. But then the New York Fed came calling because there was an opening to run the markets group, the group that Tim Geithner had wanted to resurrect a treasury. It is an army of 600 people that implements monetary policy. So I interviewed for it and was lucky enough to be chosen. And I started two weeks before COVID hit in 2020. So, and that was the ultimate crisis fighting exercise, setting up the emergency facilities to backstop the economy, to prevent another Great Depression and really trying to be as innovative and creative as we could be to keep households and businesses solvent and to keep the economy from collapsing. Well, after about a year, the election of 2020 occurred and Joe Biden was now president-elect and Jake Sullivan was named as his national security advisor. So I got a call from Jake in December of 2020 saying, you know what, President Biden and I, and Jake and I had stayed in touch throughout the Trump years, thinking about what economic policy could look like if we got another chance. And he said, look, the president wants to break down the silos between economic policy and national security. And your career has in a way almost accidentally lived at that intersection. So will you come and be my deputy and focus on the set of policy issues at that intersection? Of course I said yes. That's how I ended up at the White House. And so there's no formula, no prescription I can offer other than use a basketball analogy, this is the University of Houston, hang around the rim. Like eventually the ball will bounce your way if you're persistent enough and be ready. That's what I did, is I just, I continued to stay in the policy arena as long as I could, whenever I had the chance. And I tried to build different muscles so that if someone gave me an opportunity, I was ready to get the ball.

It's a good analogy here. Being in- I'm from North Carolina, so I- Yeah, I mean, basketball- I respect the sport. We could do all the rest of this entirely in basketball metaphors and it would probably work out just fine. So how does it work? And this is the pivot I wanna make. National security is what people think of as bombs and rockets, tanks and guns. And economic security is some sort of nebulous issue to them. So I wanted to ask this maybe a bit later, but I think it works now. How do you make economic security part of the national security agenda in this country? And yes, I read your economist article from a year ago, roughly. And I thought your points were right on the money, that you need a strategy. But how do you make a strategy for something- I mean, military people make strategies for like the Korean peninsula and you can kind of think of all the variables that'll go wrong, you know, when I lived in South Korea, you know We knew what would happen if things went wrong How do you make those kind of play sheets and how do you build economic security policy for the United States? Yeah, I think the first step Chris is to recognize and To accept and to embrace the idea that economic tools can serve geopolitical objectives I Mean that's actually been true from the beginning of this country. Oh, yeah, but but you have to almost say so Explicitly if you're a national if you're if you're leading a country for leading the United States the very top of our government You have to decide as President Biden did I? Want to use our economic tools affirmatively to advance our geopolitical objectives now Not every president will be willing to do so some would say economic interests are sacrosanct and they should never be subordinated to our national security objectives and Arguably that was the case to some extent in the 90s and 2000s So you first have to make that commitment and then second I would say If you wanted to buy strategy you have to know where you have asymmetric advantage So where do we produce or supply something other countries need and can't easily replace? either by making it By themselves or by supplying it from another country So for example the primacy of the dollar is an asymmetric advantage of the United States. So So is the dynamism of our capital markets or our unrivaled? consumer purchasing power or a dominant position in providing global services Or our net exporter status and food and energy Or you know our our alliances we have 50 treaty alliances China by contrast has one North Korea Etc etc. So where do we have an asymmetric advantage? Well from that from those asymmetric advantages You can think of economic tools that you can deploy or threaten to deploy to change the behavior of a target So that's where tools like sanctions or export controls or tariffs or price caps or investment restrictions Come in there are ways to use the leverage we have in In areas in which we have an asymmetric advantage to change the behavior of a target country that really is kind of what has Animated the effort to design sanctions against Russia and export controls to and really all of the tools I mentioned and deployed against Russia But also our adversaries elsewhere in the world North Korea Iran To some extent China etc. Etc but what hasn't been done Chris is to embed the use of those tools into a doctrine. So what are the principles that guide when we use these tools, why we use them, how we use them, and with whom and against which targets? And do we have the analytical infrastructure to make those decisions wisely with numbers, like with actual numbers in the spreadsheet rather than just words that we use at the White House podium? And do we have a strategy for economic diplomacy so that we're not alone in deploying these tools? I mean, I strongly believe that the size of the coalition is the most important force multiplier when you use economic tools, because we're in a highly interconnected global economy. And then lastly, what's really important is how you practice so-called economic statecraft. I mean, the world, unfortunately, has come to believe that we have a preference for using tools that coerce behavior by other countries. If you don't change behavior, we will cause you pain. And there's endless ink spilled about sanctions in that regard. And lo and behold, people don't like sanctions. Two-thirds of the world's population has not joined the sanctions coalition that we built to counter Russia. So the opportunity is for us to use all of the positive tools that also exist that offer the prospect of mutual economic gain and not just those that feed our perception that we're focused on causing economic pain. So for example, we can make infrastructure investments in developing countries that badly need roads and bridges and investments in the green energy transition, solar, wind, hydro, et cetera. We can form trade agreements with countries that really could benefit from having the U.S. as a bigger destination for their exports. We could offer debt relief to countries that have too much debt, and 60% of the world's low-income countries are in debt distress at the moment. We can offer technology alliances for countries that want to leapfrog to 5G, for example, or want to understand the promise of AI. Those are all positive inducements that have the capacity to induce and attract countries into our geopolitical orbit. And countries are watching, what is the balance that we're striking in the use of coercive tools versus positive inducements? And for too long, we've not been deliberate about how we strike that balance, and that's a big problem. Yeah, it's almost as if it's related to the end-of-history argument that now these countries have developed past a certain point. They're not in the dark ages, but they still have a long way to go. But somehow the United States has been mired in kind of the USAID world of support that invested in helping the poorest nations in the world. We're responding to crises all the time, which is not necessarily a strategic. Although an admiral, I think it was McRaven, said that the U.S. response to the tsunami in Indonesia in 2003... Actually my oldest son was born December 26, 2004. 2004. He called it the greatest naval victory of the 21st century, a couple years in, because the United States could do so much to respond and to truly help. And I do believe that's what Americans want to do. We don't want to go around invading countries all the time. We'd like to help them. We'd like to have good relationships with them. And living here in Texas, I mean, we talk to a lot of folks who don't really think about the outside world, other than Mexico, which is very different. I think that's such an important point you're making, Chris, because I ticked off a bunch of asymmetric advantages that we have in the U.S. The strongest is our ability to attract ideas and talent and goodwill, and it comes from the kind of actions you described in the aftermath of the tsunami. You know, the power of our story is the most powerful asset that we have, and if you don't invest in it, it will depreciate, just like any other asset. I couldn't agree more. So I want to move now to the world today, and what you're seeing now. So we are no longer in the unipolar American world that we grew up in, and your talk here is on the deja vu of going back to the past. And what strikes me is still, despite the imperfections our country has, it appears that we have friends. When we talk about China wanting to do something, it doesn't appear to have the friendships, the goodwill that allow it to reach the way we can. How do we make sure that not just our traditional friends, the Europeans, the wealthy East Asians, the OECD countries, how do we become better friends to the rest of the world economically? And maybe an example or two of where you think this is working pretty well. I think it starts with being there for countries, not just when we need them, but by making genuine good faith efforts to lift up their standard of living during normal moments, normal environments, and outside of crisis. And that really comes back to the point I was making before about all of the positive tools that we are leaving on the shelf. 

So let me give you an example. I mean, this is not an example of it working well, but I think it's the biggest geostrategic opportunity that exists. And it would be the best way for us to help the most number of people. I mentioned that 60% of the world's low income countries are in debt distress. That's double the percentage in 2015. They're in debt distress through no fault of their own. Most of these countries are in Africa, and Asia, and Latin America. And they have been beset by external shocks, the pandemic, obviously, but also the invasion of Ukraine, which disrupted food supply chains, energy supply chains, which represent a disproportionate share of what people in these countries consume. The climate transition, which is extremely expensive. Sub-Saharan Africa produces the least amount of greenhouse gas emissions, but has the highest vulnerability. To the climate transition. The increase of borrowing costs globally, because of their increase of interest rates by the Federal Reserve. That's also not their fault. So they have a lot of debt through no real fault of their own. And actually, the biggest lender to these countries is China through the Belt Road Initiative. I mean, that's how China, you mentioned they don't have a lot of friends, but they've created a lot of quote unquote soft power by becoming the most dominant bilateral lender to the developing world. What China lends to poor countries is double. The group of Western countries that belongs to this alliance called the Paris Club combined. And it lends more than the World Bank does. It lends more than most multilateral development banks do. But China is unwilling to restructure that debt in this moment. Okay. And that's the opportunity, the geostrategic opportunity. For so long now, for decades, China has been the only game in town if a country wants to borrow to develop. We have an opportunity to offer a positive alternative, which would involve the following. We go to countries that are in distress, Ghana, Zambia, Sri Lanka, Pakistan. You can name at least half a dozen. And you say China is unwilling to restructure your debt to give you some breathing space. You should walk away from that debt above a certain level of tax revenue. In other words, if you're paying more than a third of your government budget in debt service, we encourage you to tell China we're not going to repay you until you express a willingness to restructure that debt. That would be step one. Step two would be to convince the IMF that you should do for these countries what you did for Ukraine. In 2015, for the first time and the only time in its history, the IMF led to a country that owed money to another government. In that case, it was Russia. Ukraine owed money to Russia. But the IMF was still willing to lend to Ukraine because Ukraine had made good faith efforts to renegotiate and Russia refused. The IMF should do for Africa what it did for Ukraine. And then the third step would be the US and the G7 say to these countries that are in distress, if you walk away from Chinese debt, we're gonna backfill that financing at scale and at pace. Because of course these countries are gonna be very nervous to walk away from the only lender that's really stepped up for them in recent decades. And this is where we have to reimagine and invent new tools that increase our financial firepower. Even at a moment in which our budget deficits are really quite high, are causing all sorts of political dysfunction in Washington. And there are ways to do that. I won't go into all of it here, but that's an example, I think it's the most important example right now of how we can think about using our economic tools and our economic leverage in a completely different way that would convince some of the two thirds of the world's population that actually this is a geopolitical alliance that's worth pursuing. I couldn't agree more on the stress of debt serving in Latin America and watching. It was just a guarantee that in your country, if you spend enough time serving in a Latin American country, there is going to be an inflation or debt catastrophe that will blow up the society. And you're a bystander to this crush of just financial mess. Yeah, and it leads to, that distress feeds political polarization and that polarization feeds even more intensification of geopolitical conflict. So we have to break that cycle. And populism as well. Yeah, absolutely. That's where you get the Maduro's and. Yes, and that costs a lot more to deal with than what I'm proposing here. Much more, yeah. It almost seems like we want to be the banker to the world that we were during the Second World War and the First World War without the war. That's right. I mean, people talk about the arsenal, the US being the arsenal of democracy. Well, yes, we have to repair our military industrial base, but we need an economic analog too. We could be an economic arsenal of democracy. And the bang for the buck, I would argue, is multiples more than a dollar we could spend on anything else. Yeah, when bullets fly, things get very expensive, very complicated. No weapons. War is a devastating outcome. Teaching security studies, as I do, people say, well, you must believe in this stuff. And I say, no, I teach this so we can avoid it. Yeah, I mean, often when you confront a crisis, you're dealt with a range of lousy options. And the goal is to find one that's less worse than the other. And I think using economic tools is almost invariably less worse than going to war.I couldn't agree more. 

So I want to flip to one other thing. I have a couple of questions left. China.The United States has a complicated relationship with China. I got to hear Henry Kissinger a couple years ago restating the point that China, the U.S.-China relationship is the most critical relationship the world knows today and that we have to figure out a way to bury the hatchet. And not to—he is now, of course, passed, but that was kind of the shadow that he left on foreign policy. I'm old enough to remember the Cold War and our leaders saying, well, if the Soviets don't like it, tough. Are we at that point with China where we can talk about adequate policies where if China doesn't like it, tough? Or are we in a more dangerous world because we don't have all these benchmarks that we developed over the communist era, you know, from the end of the Second World War to the end of the Soviet Union? How do we, in your very well-experienced and educated opinion, say, draw a hard line to China, but also—I was reminded yesterday, buying a pair of shoes, I looked inside the tongue of every shoe and I saw a handful of shoes from other places, Vietnam, maybe Sri Lanka was another one, but it was all China. And you look around and you say, how can we do life without China in this country? And it very rapidly becomes impossible. So how do we strike that balance with Beijing? What are your ideas there? I don't think—I mean, it's easy to say that a policy, if you don't like it, tough, is misguided. That should almost go without saying. China is just a far more formidable competitor than the Soviet Union ever was. It's nearly a peer to the U.S. on military, technological, and economic dimensions. So we have to find a way to manage the competition with China. And the unfortunate reality—I mean, this is not the world as it should be, but the world as it is involves an incompatible model with ours. I mean, I do believe that President Xi—and this is really more about President Xi than any other leader in China since Deng Xiaoping— President Xi believes the U.S. and the West more generally is in structural decline due to our own fiscal profligacy, social cleavages, and creeping pessimism. And that now is the time to do away with Deng's mantra of, Hydra strength, Biden your time. And it's a moment in which China can flex its muscles, at least in the Indo-Pacific and maybe beyond. I mean, the Belt Road Initiative is an example of the ambition going well beyond its backyard. And that it's going to pursue that ambition primarily through economic and technological primacy. And it's trying to achieve primacy by competing under a different set of rules that we've become accustomed to. I mean, the economic model of China is just very different than ours. It relies upon very heavy state subsidies, propping up of state-owned enterprises and national champions, discriminating against foreign competitors, occasionally technology theft. And so if we just do nothing, if we did nothing, it would be an unfair fight between American businesses and the Chinese government. We would lose that type of competition. And indeed, we saw those communities which were most sensitive to trade with China really lose a lot of jobs and lose a lot of wage growth. And that fed a lot of polarization in our country. So it was unsustainable for our political economy not to confront an unfair and unequal set of rules between the US and China, the world's first and second largest economies. So what do we do about it? I think it's mostly what we are doing, quite honestly. I'm not just trying to be a homer for the administration on this. It's mostly investing in our own sources of competitive strength. So the investments that have been made in R&D and technology and infrastructure I think are the right ones. That ultimately is going to be what allows the US to compete effectively. But also, there have to be some defensive measures. So for example, to the extent that unfettered flows of technology between starting from the US and going to China are advancing China's military development in ways that can undermine US national interests, there have to be some controls. And that's what we're doing in terms of limiting the most advanced semiconductors and other forms of AI, quantum technology, and biotech potentially. You have to pay attention to where unfettered flows could undermine national security in a very competitive environment. The same is true to some extent of trade flows, and maybe even capital flows for direct investment, maybe portfolio flows. But then the third leg of this is you have to, you should not go it alone. So there are many other countries, not just in the G7, but also beyond, that are also suffering from an unfair terms of trade with China. And we should agree with them about what does a new rule book look like? And can we collectively encourage China to play by the same set of rules? And that's the best chance we have. I think, unfortunately, Chris, the direction of travel is probably going to remain down, but we can manage the slope of that decline and the pace. We owe that to people in our country, but also the people in China and people all over the world. Yeah, it's very clear that as a nation of immigrants we've brought wonderful, incredible people here, and there is, you know, we have to have a perspective on, you know, we are the children and grandchildren of people who were in the only industrialized economy in the world that wasn't crushed by the Second World War. So of course we rose to stratospheric heights, and of course there can be a rebalancing. And looking at the positivity of things, we see that, you know, less people are living in poverty around the world than ever before. Governments are more responsive in many ways. You look at the infrastructure plays that India has made over the last decade. Why is the Indian government popular? Well, life is improving for many people in India now. It's not ideal. It's not what we would consider perfect, and there are deep cleavages in that society as well. 

So I have one final thing that I wanted to ask, and that is, essentially, if you could wave a magic wand and build something new in government to deal with this, what would it be? Would it be an inner agency? Would it be a new, you know, because I, when I was an undergraduate, I got, Lawrence Hegelberger came to the University of Wisconsin as alma mater to hang out with the honors nerds, me, and he gave all sorts of great advice, like, you know how to nod at the right time, which is a, you know, future diplomat, kind of important, and not the right time in those conversations. But do you think that the United States government needs to overhaul itself to deal with this reality, or can we depend on the structure that, you know, the State Department is the oldest agency in the federal government, the Treasury is also incredibly old. Can they adapt and change, and can leaders go into these places and shake them around to deal with this new reality? Yeah, you know, people often talk about how markets fail, but governments fail too. Governments can fail to adapt and evolve and to innovate, and I think your, the premise of your question is spot-on. It is a moment for innovation. Perhaps it's organizational change. I actually don't think that's the binding constraint. I do think we need an infusion, a multidisciplinary infusion of talent. I think we need a SWAT team of people with skills in economics, in financial markets, in trade finance, in financial forensics, in diplomacy, in the law, in supply chains and science and technology, we need another moment. That in fact we had in the 1960s in which we bring in the best and brightest who want to solve some of these problems we've been talking about. Because you know although you're not going to get paid very much and you're going to work more hours and you may not see your family, there's never been an opportunity to do more good. Yeah, I can't disagree with that. Where public services is a way to, if you want to move the needle on something, it's not the same, certainly not the same here in academia where we toil for decades on writing articles that might build up citations over time. Moving the needle day to day here other than the right things for students to make their worlds work, right? Can I say one more thing? Sure. You actually just made me, I mean there's something that should be said. The government's not going to be able to do it by itself. Neither will the private sector and neither will academia. But actually the best tradition of American innovation has been when we fostered collaboration and cooperation among those three areas of excellence. That's when the greatest inventions have occurred, the biggest spasms of productivity and innovation happened when government realized that only through collaboration and experimentation with the private sector and academia and the business community do we actually do great things. We have to recapture that spirit. We do. My mom was going through old things. Her father was very secretive about what he did during World War II as a German immigrant to the United States. She found some sort of corporate document explaining what he did on the Manhattan Project, on the mercury switches for the bomb, which is not, there's good and bad there. But seeing the tears well up in her eyes and the pride that he had made a difference, that he had been one of the people who brought the war to a conclusion more quickly, whatever you want to say about the US opening the genies bottle of a nuclear world. We're talking hundreds of thousands of GIs that didn't get killed and wounded. That is the challenge we have is to go back and find that pride as a country and really define ourselves. Now the one last thing I have to do to prove that you're a human being is ask you a regular question and I thought a lot about these. It's a two parter and it's cats or dogs? Dogs. And why? I like creatures that express themselves with affection. Nothing against cats. I've got a crazy dog and she is an emotional drain, not a support, but she's deeply affectionate and it's helped my kids through their teenage years and it's helped me in my most stressful moments just to be able to To have a nice furry warm creature not ask any questions not say anything at all, but But acknowledge that you're you're the most important thing in their life. Yeah, it is. I am also in the dog camp. I Understand that the cat camp has good reasons to yes You can't you know just stuff a dog in a bag and take it on an airplane for instance Although getting the cat in the bag would be difficult. Well, I appreciate everything you have to say Thank you so much for coming to the University of Houston we are in your debt and And thank you very much for your time. It's an honor. Thank you Chris appreciate it.

